Dr. Teresa Dahlberg, Dean of the School of Engineering, invited members of the Cooper Union community to an open forum regarding the introduction of the new computer science major. The forum was held on December 1 and was attended by students from all three schools. Dean Dahlberg brought with her three other faculty members who were instrumental in crafting the curriculum for the new major.  These individuals include: Dr. Eric Lima, associate professor of mechanical engineering; Dr. Anita Raja, a recently hired professor of computer science; and Dr. Bonnie John, a Cooper alumnus (ME ’77) and our newest faculty member. 

The forum began with directly addressing the question of various new programs being introduced at The Cooper Union. Given the current state of our financial books, Dean Dahlberg said “I want to start by answering the question that you should probably be asking: ‘Why is Cooper Union starting new programs?” The Dean cited the average annual operating budget deficit of $12 million as a problem that could be fixed by her proposed new program. The crux of her answer was that new programs are part of the financial sustainability plan to bring in much needed revenue to the school. This is achieved in two ways: by charging tuition to currently enrolled students in existing programs and charging tuition to new students enrolled in programs launched in the future. 

Next, there was a brief overview of the computer science major followed by a lengthy, in-depth review of how the new curriculum was developed. Dean Dahlberg explained, “My style is to start with a relatively small focus group and create a straw-man” – a draft proposal of the curriculum that was then iteratively improved and updated. This focus group included people from various related disciplines and academic backgrounds, such as experts working in the software industry, faculty members, former students and education professionals. This mélange of people came together in the hope of creating a program that addresses the diversity and variety in thought demanded of computer scientists. Furthermore, their work in creating the curriculum was guided by the Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula of the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM), a guideline published by the preeminent computer science professional society. 

Dean Dahlberg explained further that, once the draft curriculum is proposed to the larger community, there are talking points on paper and “it becomes easier to say ‘I don’t like that’ or ‘I do like that’ or ‘Change this’”. This is easier than “starting with a blank sheet of paper and actually try to articulate [from scratch] what they want”. With the exhaustive detail Prof. Lima and Dr. Bonnie John presented, the new, polished curriculum does indeed seem impressive and matches the scientific and mathematical rigor of Cooper’s current engineering programs. 

The Dean went on to explain that the computer science major was voted on and rejected by the engineering curriculum committee last year. Following that, she said the computer science major is going to be temporarily housed in the physics department, with the ultimate goal of launching an independent, fourth institute of The Cooper Union with approval of the Board of Trustees. 

While she conceded that starting new programs is expensive, she argued that the “incremental costs of starting a new program are much smaller than the new revenues”. In other words, the operating budget deficit will increase in the short-term as the school gears up to launch the new program. Dean Dahlberg admitted that these capital-intensive costs might include renovating space, especially in the Foundation Building, and even renting new space elsewhere. In the long-term, however, the hope is to recuperate these expenses and work toward resolving the operating budget deficit. Given the tumultuous climate at Cooper, clearly these are controversial claims.

The Dean maintains that she is cognizant of community concerns, but that sometimes they frustrate her. She said,    
	
>“One key barrier is that faculty and students, understandably, are opposed to any new program that significantly increases the student enrollment. That’s exactly what I saw in the questions [submitted by students beforehand]: ‘We just started charging tuition, we have a fiscal operating deficit, what are you doing adding more students!!’ I think that’s a huge misunderstanding in the community.” 

She reiterated that this is just the beginning of a longer conversation with the whole community and that further matters of concerns can and should be addressed in the future. 
